Kiali extension support (#7486)
kiali/kiali: design/KEPS/extensions/proposal.md

# Solution

The proposed solution is to add support for Kiali graph "Extensions". The Extension idea has a few parts:

- A set of supported Kiali-specific metrics that, when provided, can be used to extend the Kiali traffic graph.
- A new "Extensions" graph appender that can ingest the externally provided metrics.
- Supported configuration for registering Extensions in the Kiali CR.
- Supported route or annotation information for providing links from extension graph nodes to an external UI.

## Extension Metrics

The Extension metrics are defined below. These are **Kiali-specific** metrics that would be supplied by the extension integrating with Kiali. This is to allow Kiali to work generically, against a stable and supported metric API, and to protect the extension from needing to support their own metric API (in other words, they are free to change their own metrics, they need only to be able to provide Kiali with the expected standard metrics).

_Note that there was some consideration for making the Kiali-specific metrics OTel metrics, but the OTel metric spec does not yet seem suitable. The extension framework could support OTel in the future, if it becomes desirable._

> Kiali will continue to work with only a single metrics back-end (e.g. prometheus instance). The Istio metrics and extension metrics must reside in this single metrics repository. How this is accomplished is outside the scope of this KEP, but if the extension also utilizes Prometheus, it is fairly typical to use Prometheus Federation to import the extension metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kiali will continue to work with only a single metrics back-end (e.g. Prometheus instance). The Istio metrics and extension metrics must reside in this single metrics repository. How this is accomplished is outside the scope of this KEP, but if the extension also utilizes Prometheus, it is fairly typical to use Prometheus Federation to import the extension metrics.
```

### Investigation of re-using Istio Metrics

> One major alternative to the proposed solution was to re-use Istio metrics. The pros and cons of that approach are listed below. After evaluation, it was decided that the cons outweighed the pros. In particular, the istio metricsare complex and would be more difficult to provide by the extensions. Also, it is safer to be disconnected from the Istio APIs and reply on our own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One major alternative to the proposed solution was to re-use Istio metrics. The pros and cons of that approach are listed below. After evaluation, it was decided that the cons outweighed the pros. In particular, the Istio metrics are complex and would be more difficult to provide by the extensions. Also, it is safer to be disconnected from the Istio APIs and rely on our own.
```

- Pros:

  - The biggest pro is that we can re-use the code that we already have for Istio metrics. This prevents us from having to write new code that does nearly the same thing, for our own metrics. It also prevents additional queries to Prometheus.

>   - We can still extend the istio metrics with additional attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - We can still extend the Istio metrics with additional attributes.
```

- Cons:
  - Extensions may not logically be able to supply all of the required attributes, and may have to “fudge” values. Note that extensions may be more service-oriented than workload oriented.
  - We will end up with some extension-case coding in our main metric handling, and not be able to just locate code in a dedicated appender.
  - Extensions may not be required to supply all of the fields we expect from Istio.
  - Extensions could be disabled/unregistered, and have any metrics ignored. Note that for any bulk queries (possibly outside the graph code), it may not be possible to filter out extension metrics.

>   - It’s a bit weird to tell the extending parties to supply istio metrics, when they aren’t istio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - It’s a bit weird to tell the extending parties to supply Istio metrics, when they aren’t Istio.
```

>   - The attribute names are not as simple as I’d like them to be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The attribute names are not as simple as we would like them to be.
```

| Reporter_id      | pod id or other unique discriminator                                              |
| Dest_cluster     |                                                                                   |
| Dest_namespace   |                                                                                   |
| Dest_name        |                                                                                   |
| Security         | none \| mTLS                                                                      |
| Status_code      |                                                                                   |
| Flags            | optional, defaults to “”                                                          |

## Kiali Extension Configuration

The primary extension code, a graph appender, is generic and owned by Kiali. The Extensions will look for and process extension data for each enabled extension registered in the Kiali CR. The appender would likely be always-on, and just do nothing if no extensions are configured or enabled.

```
spec:
  extensions:
    - enabled: true | false (default)
      name: <extension name>
```

## Kiali Extension UI URL linking

> While the intent of Kiali extensions is to be able to extend the Kiali graph beyond the mesh, the information about those extended services will be limited. Users may want to investigate further. If An Extension provide has its own console UI, it can ensure that the Kiali user can link to that UI. For extension nodes, the graph side panel will provide a link to the external UI, if discovered. There are two mechanisms:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the intent of Kiali extensions is to be able to extend the Kiali graph beyond the mesh, the information about those extended services will be limited. Users may want to investigate further. If an Extension provider has its own console UI, it can ensure that the Kiali user can link to that UI. For extension nodes, the graph side panel will provide a link to the external UI, if discovered. There are two mechanisms:
```

### OpenShift Routes

> On OpenShift, Kiali will look for an OpenShift route on the service named the same as the external service (or app) node. Failing that match, Kiali will look for an OpenShift route on a service named for the extension itself. If no routes are found, it will fall back to the Annotation approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On OpenShift, Kiali will look for an OpenShift route named the same as the external service (or app) node. Failing that match, Kiali will look for an OpenShift route named for the extension itself. If no routes are found, it will fall back to the annotation approach.
```
